# Rendering Arrays

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/08.md`

## Background

Let's say you've got a list of strings and you want to render those in a list.
So what you want is:

```html
<ul>
  <li>One</li>
  <li>Two</li>
  <li>Three</li>
</ul>
```

But what you have is:

```tsx
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']
```

Well, the first step is to convert that array of strings into an array of React
elements like so:

```tsx
const elements = list.map(item => <li>{item}</li>)
```

> NOTE: the example above is missing an important `key` prop we'll talk about
> soon

Next, you can pass that into a `ul` like so:

```tsx
const element = <ul>{elements}</ul>
```

To be clear, let's convert that to regular JavaScript:

```javascript
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']
const elements = list.map(item => React.createElement('li', null, item))
const element = React.createElement('ul', null, elements)
```

So two things to keep in mind here:

1. `elements` is an array of React elements
2. the last argument to `React.createElement` is `children` and we can pass an
   array to that prop.

In fact, remember that you can pass any number of children in that third
position, so check this out:

```tsx
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']
const elements = list.map(item => <li>{item}</li>)
const element = (
  <ul>
    <li>static li that comes before the elements</li>
    {elements}
    <li>static li that comes after the elements</li>
  </ul>
)
```

Compiled, this will be:

```javascript
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']
const elements = list.map(item => React.createElement('li', null, item))
const element = React.createElement(
  'ul',
  null,
  React.createElement('li', null, 'static li that comes before the elements'),
  elements,
  React.createElement('li', null, 'static li that comes after the elements'),
)
```

And naturally, you can interpolate your `.map` call as well rather than making a
variable (which is what most folks do, myself included):

```tsx
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']
const element = (
  <ul>
    <li>static li that comes before the elements</li>
    {list.map(item => (
      <li>{item}</li>
    ))}
    <li>static li that comes after the elements</li>
  </ul>
)
```

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://react-fundamentals-next.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/08.tsx)
- [Final](http://react-fundamentals-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/08.tsx)

For this exercise, we've got a list and I want you to render these out in `li`s
with a `button`, `label` and `input` because I want to show you how to handle an
error you'll observe when you're done. We'll take care of that in the extra
credit. For this one, just make your exercise look and operate just like the
final version.

## 💯 1. Adding a key prop

We've got a problem. You probably noticed the error message in the console about
it. Try this:

1. Hit the "remove" button on the last list item
2. Notice that list item is now gone 👍
3. Hit the "remove" button on the first list item
4. Notice that everything's mixed up! 😦

Let me describe what's going on here.

Here's the TL;DR: Every React element accepts a special `key` prop you can use
to help React keep track of elements between updates. If you don't provide it
when rendering a list, React can get things mixed up. The solution is to give
each element a unique (to the array) `key` prop, and then everything will work
fine.

Let's dive in a little deeper:

If you re-render that list with an added item, React doesn't really know whether
you added an item in the middle, beginning, or end. And the same goes for when
you remove an item (it doesn't know whether that happened in the middle,
beginning, or end either).

To be clear, _we_ know as the developer because we wrote the code, but as far as
React is concerned, we simply gave it some react elements before, we gave it
some after, and now React is trying to compare the before and after with no
knowledge of how the elements got from one position to another.

Sometimes it's not a big deal, because React's best-guess is right and it works
out ok. However, if any of those React elements represent a component that is
maintaining state (like the value of an input or focus state), that can be
pretty problematic, which this exercise demonstrates.

To solve this problem, we need to give React a hint so it can associate the old
React elements with the new ones we're giving it due to the change. We do this
using a special prop called the `key` prop.

In this exercise, we have a list of fruit that appear and can be removed. There
is state that exists (managed by the browser) in the `<input />` for each of the
fruit: the input's `value` (initialized via the `defaultValue` prop).

Without a `key` prop, for all React knows, you removed an input and gave another
label different text content, which leads to the bug we'll see in the exercise.

So here's the rule:

**Whenever you're rendering an array of React elements, each one must have a
unique `key` prop.**

📜 You can learn more about what can go wrong when you don't specify the `key`
prop in my blog post
[Understanding React's key prop](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/understanding-reacts-key-prop).

📜 Also, you can get a deeper understanding in this blog post:
[Why React needs a key prop](https://epicreact.dev/why-react-needs-a-key-prop).
That'll give you a bit of what's going on under the hood, so I recommend reading
this!

🐨 The React elements we're rendering are the `li` elements, so for this extra
credit, add a `key` prop there. You can use the `item.id` for the value to
ensure that the key value is unique for each element.

🦉 Note, the key only needs to be unique within a given array. So this works
fine:

```tsx
const element = (
  <ul>
    {list.map(listItem => (
      <li key={listItem.id}>{listItem.value}</li>
    ))}
    {list.map(listItem => (
      <li key={listItem.id}>{listItem.value}</li>
    ))}
  </ul>
)
```

🦉 In our example, the `value` of the input is managed by the browser, but this
has even bigger implications when we start working with our own state and
side-effects. It's a little too early to demonstrate this for you, but you
should know that when React removes a component from the DOM, it gets
"unmounted" which will trigger side-effect cleanups, and if new elements are
added then those will be "mounted" and will trigger your side-effects. This can
cause some surprising and problematic issues for your users. So just remember
the rule and always provide a `key` when rendering an array. Later when you have
more React experience, you can come back to this exercise and expand it a bit
with custom components that manage state and side-effects to observe the
problems caused when you ignore the `key`.

---

Once you've finished fixing the extra credit, you should also checkout the Focus
Key demo. You'll find the source code for it in
`src/examples/focus-key-demo.tsx`. You can see this file running locally here:
http://localhost:3000/isolated/examples/focus-key-demo.tsx and open the
production deployed version here:
https://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/examples/focus-key-demo.tsx

You can observe that when we're talking about "state" we're also talking about
keyboard focus as well as what text is selected! As you play around with this,
try selecting text in the inputs and observe how the first two examples differ
from the last one. You'll notice that using the array `index` as a key is no
different from React's default behavior, so it's unlikely to fix issues if
you're having them. Best to use a unique ID. Play around with it! (Remember,
you'll find the source for this demo in the `examples` directory).

There are some other interesting things you can do with `key`s as well (like
changing them on an element to intentionally reset the state of a component).
Feel free to play around with that if you like, but we'll be using that in a
future workshop so look forward to it!

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Fundamentals%20%E2%9A%9B&e=08%3A%20Rendering%20Arrays&em=).
