# Rendering Arrays

## Background

One of the more tricky things with React is the requirement of a `key` prop when
you attempt to render a list of elements.

If we want to render a list like this, then there's no problem:

```jsx
const ui = (
  <ul>
    <li>One</li>
    <li>Two</li>
    <li>Three</li>
  </ul>
)
```

Then that's no problem, but rending an array of elements is very common:

```jsx
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']

const ui = (
  <ul>
    {list.map(listItem => (
      <li>{listItem}</li>
    ))}
  </ul>
)
```

Those will generate the same HTML, but what it actually does is slightly
different. Let's re-write it to see that difference:

```jsx
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']
const listUI = list.map(listItem => <li>{listItem}</li>)
// notice that listUI is an array
const ui = <ul>{listUI}</ul>
```

So we're interpolating an array of renderable elements. This is totally
acceptable, but it has interesting implications for when things change over
time.

If you re-render that list with an added item, React doesn't really know whether
you added an item in the middle, beginning, or end. And the same goes for when
you remove an item (it doesn't know whether that happened in the middle,
beginning, or end either).

In this example, it's not a big deal, because React's best-guess is right and it
works out ok. However, if any of those React elements represent a component that
is maintaining state, that can be pretty problematic, which this exercise
demonstrates.

## Exercise

In this exercise, we have a list of fruit that appear and can be removed. There
is state that exists (managed by the browser) in the `<input />` for each of the
fruit. Without a key, React has no way of knowing which React element you return
the second time corresponds to the specific DOM nodes it removes, so it does
it's best. For all React knows, you removed an input and gave another label
different text content, which leads to the bug we'll see in the exercise.

If you remove them from bottom to top then things work fine, but if you remove
them in any other order you'll notice that the wrong inputs are getting removed.

This one is more of a demo than an exercise because the actual solution is
pretty simple. Just do what the emoji says :)

## Extra Credit

### 💯 Focus Demo

This extra credit is 100% demo. You can find it by going to this route:
/isolated/exercises-final/09.extra-1

Here's a deployed version:
https://react-fundamentals.netlify.com/isolated/exercises-final/09.extra-1

From here you can observe that state also includes keyboard focus as well as
selection! You'll also notice that using the array `index` as a key is no
different from React's default behavior, so it's unlikely to fix issues if
you're having them. Best to use a unique ID. Play around with it!
